### 2025-3-5 Wednesday 4:30pm
by Tori Cooper

Urban Design Commision met Monday night to discuss two new proposals with developers, both located on East Washington Avenue. Before getting into the thick of things, the Commission moved one item to their consent agenda for unanimous approval:

	•	[Legistar 87165](https://madison.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=7135315&GUID=749DA5A6-EFDE-4474-BBC2-A76F6780BB7F): Comprehensive Design Review for Signage in an Urban Design District (UDD) for a property located at **849 E Washington Avenue and 10 S Paterson Street** in **District 6.**

#### 3361-3375 East Washington Avenue

Matthew Tills, with the proposal’s developer JSD, reviewed their plans for the corner of North Fair Oaks Avenue and East Washington Avenue. The proposal is to develop a **new mixed-use building** in **Urban Design District 5,** located in **District 12** (Legistar 87242)[https://madison.legistar.com/gateway.aspx?m=l&id=/matter.aspx?key=96723). The  property is currently broken up into seven parcels, made up of two single-family homes and a small strip mall--which JSD proposes replacing with a single mixed-use building. After meeting with neighbors, JSD has included a parking lot in their plans. The lot would allow for entry and exit from both directions on Fair Oaks, but would only allow for right-hand entry from and right-hand exit onto East Wash in order to comply with current traffic flow. The lot is also being designed to accommodate the proposed commercial space. The plan includes a courtyard over parts of the parking area, which provides additional green space to tenants—plus private entry patios with some green space in front of each ground-level unit to indicate private use. Tills later mentioned the possibility of including railing on patios to further indicate the spaces as private to tenants and discourage loitering from members of the public who may be waiting for a bus. This would be in addition to the developers incorporating as much greenery to the landscape as possible, including a significant number of shrubbery, plants, and trees.

(image)

Commissioner Klehr, who was the most vocal about accessibility and planning for the project,  noted she can “appreciate [the] sophistication and color” the developer is proposing; however, she brought up concerns over the transition from a commercial to residential area. She then questioned  why JSD is not stepping down with this development similar to their previous work with the Rise Development. While Tills did not provide a direct answer, hethe did reassure the Commission JSD would be willing to step the building down if it would be critical to the project’s approval. While Klehr agreed the mixed-use space was in accordance with the North East Plan, she expressed hopes for more commercial space in order to make the area more walkable for residents. Klehr additionally requested further consideration on JSD’s part of how the color scheme would impact lighting in the area--specifically how the colors would either absorb or throw light that hits the building and impact the transition into a residential area from a high-traffic area.

(image)

Commissioner Klehr also referenced the space at the intersection of Fair Oaks and East Wash that would be used by pedestrians utilizing the nearby BRT stop. Klehr requested consideration for more maneuverability, as she expects higher traffic on that corner for public transportation users. Tills was amenable to the change, stating the nearby BRT stop was critical in JSD’s plans and how it is “symbiotic for urban transport.” This later brought into question how the parking area would accommodate pedestrians using it as a shortcut between the two streets. In response to further questioning by Commissioner Klehr, Tills confirmed that City Traffic has been involved with the project as part of a meeting held with neighbors at the end of January. Tills said they are still working on the exact parking layout, but want it to be safe for pedestrian use while maximizing usability for the commercial spaces which will make up the lower level of the project. Alder Rummel chimed in to question additional parking in the area, namely street parking availability. Tills informed the Commission there is not immediate street parking next to the development site, but there is available street parking further south on Fair Oaks.

Before bringing the discussion to a close, Commissioners Graham and Mbilinyi advocated for additional public and private spaces on the exterior of the building. Commissioner Mbilinyi asked for further consideration of an expanded patio area, while Commissioner Graham draw specific attention to the plan’s inclusion of patios with step downs on the East Wash side, but not the Fair Oaks facing portion of the building. Tills confirmed Commissioner Graham’s suspicion the site’s topography was a factor; however, Tills noted JSD was working with civil engineering to explore the possibility of either individual or shared patio steps to allow for private or semi-private entry on the Fair Oaks side.

#### 501 E Washington Avenue

Another development proposal was presented for a parcel located between East Washington Avenue, South Blair Street, and South Franklin Street. Steven Rosemitch, from JLA Architecture, presented the design plan for the **new residential building,** which is set to be located in **Urban Design District 4,** in **District 6** [Legistar 87243](https://madison.legistar.com/gateway.aspx?m=l&id=/matter.aspx?key=96724). Rosemitch specifically highlighted how JLA would be addressing specific aspects of the proposed development’s location and topography. For one, there is a considerable grade change on South Blair. Due to this, JLA has decided to adjust their plan to have the building’s lobby on South Franklin so as to promote accessibility and avoid  an  sending traffic onto East Wash. To aid in the curb appeal of the South Blair side, JLA included plinth in their design in addition to the strong masonry base, which will be used to add contrasting greenery to the area. Secondly, the building has been designed to frame the capital as you come up East Wash—promoting the view and staying compliant with City height ordinances while maximizing residential space in a high-housing-need area. Additionally, parking would be included under the building. Commissioner Bernau later questioned the exact location and if the windows seen on the lower level would look into a garage, to which Rosemitch clarified parking would be below the window line (seen in figure X), underground.

(image)

While the Urban Design Commission is well aware of the current housing crisis Madison faces, commissioners were skeptical of the proposed design and how it fit into the area. Commissioner Bernau questioned Rosemitch on zoning requirements regarding transitioning down the South Franklin side of the building into a historic district. Rosemitch said he was not aware of any, with Staff member Jessica Vaughn clarifying the site is zoned as Urban Mixed Used (U-MX) and there are no requirements for zoning transitioning into the First Settlement area. This brought further scrutiny from the Commision, as several other members brought up design context in regard to the much smaller historic buildings and homes adjacent to the parcel. Commissioner Mbilinyi jumped in to draw attention to how overbearing the building schematics appear in comparison to others in the area, which was echoed by Alder Rummel who advocated for toning the building down. Commissioner Bernau additionally argued the need to consider the smaller structures in the First Settlement—impacting the Urban Design Commission’s judgement of scale and size of the proposal when thinking about how the development fits into this neighborhood, as those historic buildings are likely to remain for a considerable amount of time. Alder Rummel agreed, noting historic landmarks take legal precedence. Vaughn then reminded the Commission they will be both an approving and advisory body on this matter, with sensitivity of context as well as compatibility needing to be considered moving forward. Vaughn again referenced current zoning as U-MX, so the development will likely require conditional use approval from the Planning Commission with regard to context and sustained aesthetic desirability.

(image)

Multiple members of the commission also expressed interest in JLA offering a design that included two more modest buildings, rather than a large, single structure. Commissioner Klehr commented that although she agreed, she liked that the design “snaked around” to create a courtyard space. This led to Commissioner Mbilinyi noting how small the proposed courtyard appears, with Commissioner Bernau asking for clarification on the purpose of such a narrow courtyard on the interior of the design. Rosemitch informed the Commission the original design originally had the courtyard facing East Wash; however, JLA determined the back end of the building would make better use of the space. The updated design would allow for more facade space, as well as increased sunlight to otherwise interior units—ultimately aiding in breaking down massing of the building. Rosemitch also noted the original design included more balconies, but after a neighborhood meeting JLA reduced balcony sizes and recessed their settings to increase courtyard space.

(image)

All in all, while the Commission like certain aspects of the design, just about every compliment was followed with a “but.” Bernau commended the inclusion of plinths in the design,but stated this area is not well suited for lawn, pushing for JLA to consider perennial and shrubs instead. Commissioner Mbilinyi said vertical massing was appropriate, but was not pleased by the horizontal aspects. JLA boasted their color and material choice to help break elevations and create shadow lines—only for Alder Rummel to flatly state she does not think the material is appropriate for the area and the colors are too dark, but she did think the corner design was strong. Staff somewhat staved off further backhanding by jumping in to recognize the developer is tasked with bridging context between the East Wash developments and the First Settlement on South Franklin as they have two very different profiles and aesthetics. This was highlighted in the Staff Report, which noted the challenge of transitioning between two contrasting areas and drawing into question which design takes priority while establishing a way to make the designs coalesce. As a middle ground proposal, Staff suggested the development look like multiple buildings, similar to their previous Core Space Development between East Gorham Street, South Broom Street, and East Johnson Street.

### Secretary’s Report

The Plan Commission recommended to approve an alternate resolution to the Lamphouse Ad Hoc Report. Attached to the approval was an appendix which included changes previously discussed by the Urban Design Committee--namely, outright protecting View 1, while protecting Views 2 and 3 as appropriate in conjunction with downtown heigh maps and zoning codes. Additionally the LEO development‘s preliminary plat on Madison’s East side was denied and  placed on file without prejudice. Lastly, the Plan Commission took the Urban Design Commission’s recommendation regarding Seven Brew Coffee development planned for East Washington Avenue, approving the proposal with the condition of adding additional pedestrian way-finding.
